xPx Gauri was born Gauri Chibber in Delhi to Punjabi Hindu parents Savita and Colonel Ramesh Chandra Chibber. She was raised in the suburb of Panchsheel Park, Delhi. She completed her schooling at Loreto Convent School, she completed twelfth from Modern School, Delhi; and graduated from Lady Shri Ram College with B.A. (Hons.). She also completed a six-month course in fashion design from the National Institute of Fashion Technology and learnt tailoring due to her father's garment business. xxPx

xPx In 2002, Gauri Khan and her husband Shah Rukh Khan established the film production and distribution company Red Chillies Entertainment. It was transformed from the now defunct Dreamz Unlimited which the couple first established in 1999. She serves as co-chairperson and the main producer of all the films produced under the banner. The first film she produced was Farah Khan's directorial debut Main Hoon Na. The film performed well at the box office, becoming the second highest-grossing film of the year. She also made a guest appearance in two of the film she has produced Om Shanti Om (2007) and Happy New Year (2014). xxPx

xPx She is managed by Bottomline Media, and close confidante and friend Tanaaz Bhatia from NYC. () Aftershock. Khan also designed a fashion collection titled ‘Cocktails and Dreams’ for Satya Paul in 2016. xxPx

xPx Khan first expressed interest in interior design as a hobby while renovating her Bandra bungalow, Mannat. The bungalow is a tourist spot and a heritage building deemed important to the townscape and hence exempt from demolition. However, in 2010, she professionally ventured into interior designing in partnership with interior designer and close friend Sussanne Khan to design exclusive interior projects together. The same year, they collaborated on their first commercial project together in Vadodara. In 2011, Khan (Gauri) partnered with Khan (Sussanne) again to launch and introduce The Charcoal Project foundation in Mumbai. xxPx

xPx Khan launched her first concept store called The Design Cell located in Worli, Mumbai in early 2014. The store showcases furniture designed by Khan herself as well as various other Indian designers. In 2016, Khan was invited to show her designs at the prestigious Maison et Objet show in Paris. xxPx

xPx In August 2017, Khan launched her design studio, Gauri Khan Designs that spans over 8,700 square ft at Juhu, Mumbai. Khan has collaborated with various international artists including Roberto Cavalli and Ralph Lauren for home accessories. In a 2017 interview with Vogue India, Khan spoke about her project, she said "It’s been an exciting experience, seeing it all come together. I’ve been influenced by my travels across India and the globe. I take a keen interest in the architecture of places when I travel." For her work in the field of interior design, Khan was awarded with the Excellence in Design Award at the Hello! Hall of Fame Awards in 2018. xxPx
