xPx The government will pay parents’ contribution as well as the daycare centres’ subsidies for this period. Parents whose children usually attend a non-subsidized daycare centre will not be charged for daycare services during this period. xxPx

xPx Workers in the public sector will continue to be paid and will be asked to engage in teleworking when possible. Employers in the private sector are encouraged to display flexibility. Compensation measures will be implemented and announced shortly. xxPx 

xPx The Gouvernement du Québec is assessing the situation in real time to ensure that Quebecers’ health remains the priority. If such a decision is made, the individuals concerned will be notified in due course. xxPx

xPx The main symptoms of COVID-19 are as follows: Fever, Cough, Difficulty breathing.
The symptoms can be mild (similar to a cold) or more severe (such as those associated with pneumonia and respiratory or kidney failure). xxPx

xPx There is no single response. We are appealing to the parents’ collaboration and good judgment. When a change of custody seems necessary, ensure that each family has abided by the hygiene instructions issued by public health authorities. Court judgments and orders must also be observed. For any specific situation, you can call the Clinique d’assistance juridique COVID-19 established by the Ministère de la Justice du Quebec and the Barreau du Québec at 1-866-699-9729 (toll free) xxPx

xPx It is possible to deliver groceries to elderly people or immunodeficient individuals solely if you do not display any symptoms and have not returned from a trip within less than 14 days. It is important at all times to maintain distance between individuals, avoid direct contacts and abide by the usual rules of hygiene when you cough or sneeze. xxPx

xPx According to the World Health Organization, pregnant women are at no greater risk than adults in general of complications related to COVID-19. Scientists note that there is no known risk of malformation or mother-to-foetus transmission. The usual preventive rules apply to pregnant women. For more information, see the Information for pregnant women page. xxPx

xPx COVID-19 usually infects the nose, throat and lungs. In most cases, it is spread by: close contact with an infected person when the person coughs or sneezes; touching infected surfaces with your hands and then touching your mouth, nose or eyes. xxPx
