How can I stay informed?
Coronavirus updates are available at Québec.ca/coronavirus.
Pay attention to the notices and follow the instructions from government as relayed by the media (television, newspapers, radio, Internet).

The COVID-19 pandemic Definition
COVID-19 is a disease caused by a coronavirus, a highly contagious virus that affects the respiratory tract. It is transmitted from one person to another.
A pandemic occurs when a new virus spreads throughout the world. Since humans are not protected against the new virus, a greater number of people become sick.

Transmission of the virus
The coronavirus COVID-19 is very easily transmitted by tiny droplets that are expelled into the air when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
If the person covers their nose and mouth when sneezing or coughing, the droplets will land in their elbow, upper arm, mask, facial tissue or handkerchief.
We can become infected by the coronavirus (COVID-19) when:
• Our eyes, nose or mouth is in contact with droplets from an infected person who coughs or sneezes
• We touch a contaminated object or surface with our hands then touch our face
Symptoms develop on average from 5 to 7 days after contamination, but may appear between 2 and 12 days. To be prudent, 14 days of isolation is recommended.
Coronavirus propagates during close contact between people.
Close contact can occur when:
• Someone lives in the same home as an infected person
• Someone provides care to an infected person
• People gather in public places and meetings

CORONAVIRUS Persons at risk
80% of infected individuals recover without any special treatment.
Some categories of people are at risk of dying from severe respiratory complications of a coronavirus infection, such as pneumonia or acute respiratory syndrome.

The following categories of people infected by the coronavirus (COVID-19) are at risk of dying:
People aged 70 or more
People with the following underlying conditions
–– Chronic heart diseases
–– Chronic pulmonary diseases
–– Cancer and immune deficiency
–– Diabetes

Symptoms
A coronavirus disease (COVID-19) can resemble the common cold or be much more like severe respiratory diseases.
FREQUENT SYMPTOMS
Cough
Difficulty breathing (dyspnea)
Fever
Pneumonia
Extreme fatigue

What should I do when I have COVID-19 symptoms?
Stay at home and avoid contact with others
Wash your hands frequently
Follow good respiratory hygiene practices:
–– Cover your mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing (elbow, upper arm or disposable paper tissue)
Call the 1-877-644-4545 coronavirus hotline to report your symptoms and follow the instructions you are given
If you have major difficulty breathing, call 911

How to prevent and protect against a coronavirus (COVID-19) infection
There is currently no known treatment or vaccine for coronavirus (COVID-19).
Prevention is the only way to protect yourself and protect others.
Avoid contact Always remain 2 metres away from others.
Do not hug, shake hands or kiss.
If a close friend or family member shows COVID-19 symptoms, avoid contact with their personal objects such as glassware, dishes, etc. Ask the person to use hygienic practices when coughing or sneezing and immediately wash their hands. As much as possible, remain at a safe distance from others.

Wash your hands OFTEN
Frequent hand washing is the best way to protect yourself and others from coronavirus (COVID-19). Teach your children and close friends and family the right way to wash their hands (see page 16).

Wear a protective mask
Wearing a protective mask is recommended if you are coughing or sneezing around other people (see page 17). The mask will help to prevent contaminating them.

WHEN should I wash my hands?
As often as possible, but especially:
• Before I touch my face (eyes, mouth, nose)
• After I cough, sneeze or blow my nose
• Before and after I provide care to a close friend or family member
• When my hands are visibly dirty or after I touch a dirty object
• Before and after I prepare meals
• Before and after I eat
• After using the toilet
• Before and after going to a public place

WHAT DO I USE to wash my hands?
It is recommended to wash hands with lukewarm water and soap or with a 60%70% alcohol-based gel, foam or liquid sanitizer.

Rest
If you have coronavirus symptoms (see page 5), feel weak and fatigued, rest will help you fight the disease. Limit your contact with others until you have no more symptoms. You can go back to your normal activities when your state of health allows you to.
Stay at home if you have one or more symptoms.

Drink frequently
Frequent drinking is important because fever causes perspiration and major loss of liquids.
You should drink at least 1.5 litres of liquids every day.
You can drink cold or warm liquids, as you prefer. Avoid alcoholic beverages and liquids like coffee or tea that contain caffeine, as well as soft drinks.
Alcohol and caffeine will cause you to urinate more often and increase loss of liquids.
Watch out for these signs of dehydration:
• Extreme thirst
• Dry mouth and tongue
• Infrequent and/or dark urine
• Dizziness, confusion and headaches

Protect your entourage
Do the following to protect your entourage until you have no more symptoms (fever, cough, fatigue):
• Self-isolate in a bedroom to avoid contaminating others
• Sleep and eat meals alone in your bedroom
• Only use one bathroom
• Cover your nose and mouth when sneezing or coughing, ideally with a facial tissue (see page 17). Wash your hands right after
If you do not have any facial tissue, cough or sneeze into your elbow or upper arm, which are not in contact with people or objects (see page 17)
Spit into a facial tissue
Throw away facial tissues into a garbage bag in a trash can with a lid. Keep used tissues away from children
Do not allow visitors in the house

Keep your environment clean
The coronavirus (COVID-19) can survive for the following lengths of time on objects and surfaces:
• 3 hours on dry surfaces
• 6 days on moist surfaces
Therefore, it is important that you clean counters, sinks, door handles and all other surfaces frequently touched by hands.
Cleaning and disinfecting are very efficient ways of eliminating the virus.  Use soap and water or household cleaners to clean surfaces.
Use a 1/9 disinfectants.  bleach-water solution or 
For example, this means 10 ml of bleach to 90 ml of water.
If you are sick, your sheets, towels, cloths and dishware can be washed with those of others in the home using normal detergents.

Seek help
While many of us have the necessary resources to deal with a COVID-19 situation, others may not. If you are concerned, do not hesitate to ask for or accept help. Talk about it with your close family members.  You can also dial 211 for help or ask your local CLSC to connect you with their home care and services resource.

Basic information for your kids
Show them:
• The right way to wash their hands with soap and water (see page 16)
• How to sneeze and wipe their nose with disposable facial tissue (see page 17)
• How to sneeze and cough into their elbow and onto their upper arm (see page 17)
Remind them often to keep at a distance from sick people.

Stay informed
Listen to the radio, watch TV, read the newspaper and/or go to the following government website often: Québec.ca/ coronavirus.
Keep the Decision Fact Sheet close at hand (see page 21). It contains advice on what to do in different symptom situations.

Organize your work
As much as possible, work from home If you must go to your place of work:
• Wash your hands frequently with soap and water. If that is not an option, use an alcohol-based gel, foam or liquid hand sanitizer
• Clean hard surfaces and objects in your work area that could be touched by your workmates
Do not shake hands, hug or kiss hello
Stay home if you are sick or have symptoms. Get informed about your employer’s return to work directives

Medication for relieving symptoms
Use medication intelligently
If you have no complications, coronavirus (COVID-19) treatment does not require special medication.

anti-inflammatories
NSAID anti-inflammatories used to alleviate fever that contain ibuprofen, such as Advil® and Motrin® may aggravate coronavirus disease (COVID-19), but this information comes from clinical observations and has not been confirmed. If you are already taking anti-inflammatories and test positive for coronavirus, speak with your pharmacist, doctor or specialized nurse practitioner.

Over-the-counter medication
Over-the-counter medication can be used to relieve coronavirus (COVID-19) symptoms. But read the label carefully and only take the recommended dose.
It is strongly suggested to ask your pharmacist for instructions before taking over-the-counter medication when you have symptoms.
Do not take medications with the same ingredients at the same time, such as Tylenol® and Tylenol sinus®.
If you have other health problems, ask your pharmacist for advice or call Info-Santé 811 before taking over-the-counter medication.

Relieving symptoms
Fever is one of the body’s defence mechanisms that help fight infection.
Acetaminophen is recommended to reduce fever and make you more comfortable unless your health professional advises against it or you are allergic.
Fever is defined as follows:
• Children: 38 °C (100.4 °F) and more (rectal)
• Adults: 38 °C (100.4 °F) and more (oral)
• Seniors: 37.8 °C (98.6 °F) and more (oral)
OR
• 1.1 °C higher than normal

Sore throat
Gargle with a glass of salt water: 2.5 ml (1/2 tsp.) of salt in 250 ml (1 cup) of lukewarm water (do not swallow) Hard candy and/or lozenges, preferably sugar-free, may also relieve a sore throat

Caring for sick children
Prevention, precaution and care for children are the same as for adults.
See a doctor in the following situations:
• Your child is under the age of three months and has a rectal temperature in excess of 38 °C (100.4 °F)
• Your child has a chronic disease or is immune-deficient and has a rectal temperature in excess of 38 °C (100.4 °F)
• Your child seems very sick, is listless and you have trouble waking him up
Give appropriate medication
If your child is older than three months and has rectal fever in excess of 38 °C (100.4 °F), you can administer acetaminophen (Tylenol®, Tempra®, etc.) in accordance with the instructions on the label and your child’s weight.
Make your child comfortable
Ensure that the child:
• Is wearing light clothing
• Rests a lot
• Drinks enough and shows no signs of dehydration, especially in case of vomiting and/or diarrhea
Watch for the following signs of dehydration:
• No urination over a six-hour period of time for babies (eight hours for older children)
• Recessed fontanelles (soft spots on the top of babies’ heads)
• Cold skin that does not regain normal shape quickly when pinched
• Irritability, somnolence
If your child shows signs of dehydration, administer as needed rehydration solutions such as Pedialyte®, which is sold in pharmacies. Ask your pharmacist for advice.
Maintain room temperature at around 20 °C (68 °F).
Always take your child’s temperature with a thermometer, preferably rectally
Wait 30 minutes before taking the child’s temperature orally if he or she has eaten something cold or hot
Do not rub your child with alcohol to lower fever as it may be absorbed by the skin or enter the lungs and can be toxic
Do not give ibuprofen (Advil®, Motrin®, etc.) to children under the age of six months
Do not give acetylsalicylic acid (Aspirin®, etc.) to children or teenagers under the age of 18

Eldercare
Seniors are more susceptible to infection and complications due to the normal aging process. They also have a higher risk of dying from COVID-19.
A coronavirus (COVID-19) infection can manifest itself in different ways in seniors.
While seniors may have no fever, they may show the following signs of an infection:
• Fast onset loss of autonomy (lower interest in participating in care, preparing meals, etc.)
• Loss of appetite
• Confusion
• Sleepiness
• Falling
• Onset of incontinence
• Increased agitation or sluggishness
• Sleep disturbances
• Irritability
Remind seniors to drink frequently
Encourage them to take more liquids with meals and medications
Discourage seniors from drinking alcohol and beverages with caffeine
The prevention, protection and care instructions shown in this guide also apply to seniors.
Seniors are at greater risk of the following:
Malnutrition
Seniors need to increase their protein consumption when they have an infection.
Proteins are found in meat, fish, legumes, eggs, milk products and nuts.
Seniors need to have protein-rich snacks in between meals and at bedtime.

Loss of autonomy
Remaining immobile while lying in bed or sitting in a chair for just 24 hours can have a major impact on loss of autonomy and the onset of complications.
As soon as possible, get the person up and moving, dress on his or her own, and perform personal hygiene and other daily activities in accordance with capacity.
This will considerably reduce the risk of complications.

Seniors Dehydration
Seniors are at greater risk of dehydration especially because the thirst sensation becomes less acute as we age. Seniors do not always think of drinking because they do not feel thirsty.

Wash hands
Wash hands often, especially:
When they are visibly dirty
After sneezing or coughing
After you blow your nose
After using the toilet
After changing a diaper
Before preparing, touching or serving food
Before eating
Before putting in or taking out your contact lenses
After moving garbage

How to wash hands
Wash your hands with soap and water. Antibacterial soap is not required.
If soap and water are not available you can use an alcoholbased gel, foam or liquid sanitizer (at least 60% alcohol).
Sanitizers must be stored out of reach of young children. They can only be used occasionally and with supervision.
Take a little gel, foam or liquid sanitizer with your fingertips and rub both sides of your hands, fingers and in between your fingers. Continue to rub until your hands are dry without having used paper towels.

Respiratory hygiene
Cough and sneeze without contaminating others.
COVER your mouth and nose with a tissue when coughing or sneezing.
THROW the tissue in the garbage.
IF NO TISSUE IS AVAILABLE, cough or sneeze into your elbow or on your upper arm.
WASH your hands often. If soap and water are unavailable, use a hand sanitizer.

Anti-spray masks
If you have a fever or are coughing or sneezing, wear a mask in the following situations:
• Other people are in close proximity
• You are in the hospital emergency room or a medical clinic waiting room
• You are in a public place
• You are near a sick person who is not wearing a mask, such as a young child 
If you have no symptoms but need to be in contact to administer care to someone
who has a fever or is coughing or sneezing, you should wear a mask.
Place your used mask in a garbage bag in a closed trash can and out of reach of children.
Wash your hands after removing your mask.
Use anti-spray masks that are sold over the counter in pharmacies or other stores.
You may also wear a cotton scarf, but wash it every day.
Change your mask when it becomes damp.
Never touch your eyes, nose and mouth with your hands.

Adults at risk of severe respiratory symptoms
Adults at risk of severe respiratory symptoms:
• I have a fever higher than 38 °C/100.4 °F.
• I am in an at-risk category for severe respiratory complications (senior or person with chronic cardiac and/or pulmonary problems, immune deficiency or diabetes).

Keep informed.
The Québec.ca/coronavirus website has up-to-date news.

Preventing infections
It’s a collective responsability
Cough into your sleeve
Throw away used tissues
Wash your hands
Keep your distance
Stay home